>>>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC] And
I think many people today
don't know what to
believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory.
Think of your darkest
hour in your life.
Did you seriously contemplate
maybe killing yourself?
Well that's what happened to
our special guest Jim Paris,
author of "Pray for
a Financial Miracle."
You really thought
about doing yourself in?
>>JAMES PARIS: George, I
planned my own suicide out
in detail on three occasions.
And I came very, very close.
>>NOORY: You were
that despondent?
>>PARIS: I was.
I reached the point
where I didn't
want to wake up in the morning.
I had nightmares about
what was happening to me
and every-- where I was
at in life, all the money
I had lost, how
bleak my future was.
I didn't want to live.
It was just so painful.
You know, to wake
up in the morning,
within five seconds it would
come back to me that, OK.
This is my reality again.
And I just didn't want
to live another day.
>>NOORY: You lost a
couple million dollars
because your brother
had embezzled money
from the firm that you were both
working at, your advisory firm.
And once you realized that,
why didn't you just say,
aw heck with it.
Why kill yourself over
something like that, Jim?
>>PARIS: Well, you know,
what happened with me, I
made the mistake that
a lot of people do,
was I had tied up my
self esteem and my self
worth into what I
did for a living.
And so here I was traveling
all around the country,
the financial genius,
writing financial books.
They're sending limousines
to the airport to pick me up.
I'm on all the big TV
shows and so forth.
How could I go back and
be on another TV program
or ever be called on to
give financial advice when
I myself had not only just lost
all of my operating capital,
$2 million, but also in the
process of my brother cooking
the books, I had
basically, in essence,
sort of drummed myself out
of the regulated securities
business because of that.
So my meal ticket,
the goose that
was laying the golden
egg, if you will,
my securities licensing,
was all also destroyed
as a result of what
my brother did.
So it was not only
just the loss of money,
but the loss of any way to
recoup that money any way
that I knew how.
I mean, from the age of 21,
I had made my living mostly
from the securities industry.
And so, saw that
coming to an end.
The analogy would be a
lawyer who was disbarred,
and spent his whole life getting
ready to go to college and law
school--
>>NOORY: And wasn't trained
to do anything else.
>>PARIS: Passing the
bar exam, and then he
loses his law license.
And that's sort of
where I was at, George.
At a point where I believed
I had nothing to live for.
>>NOORY: How long did it
take you, Jim, to rebound?
>>PARIS: Well, you
know, it was a process.
I wish I could tell
people, well you
know what, I had an epiphany,
and the next morning I
was just great.
It really took me
about five years.
And I'll tell you that
during those years
I found a different person.
I'll give you one, just
one strange example.
>>NOORY: Did you
like that person?
>>PARIS: I didn't like
that person at first,
because I always thought
of the people that
stopped to smell the roses as
the unambitious, lazy people
that I was trying to
be different from.
>>NOORY: They're
the smart people.
>>PARIS: They are,
and I realized that.
But here I was, a guy that
never had any time to work out.
Here I am, going to the
gym for two hours a day.
Swimming laps, lifting weights,
running on the treadmill.
I'm a guy that's sitting
down and starting a diary,
and starting to read not
just my Bible every day,
but also different influential
thinkers like Wayne Dyer,
and other people as well.
And starting to really
think about things
in a whole different context
than what I thought about.
So it was a journey, George.
It took five years.
And I'll also tell
you that counseling
was important as well.
I went in counseling.
In the beginning it was every
week, I went for an hour.
Then it lessened
to once a month,
then it lessened to
once every three months.
And I've shared that with
people in my seminars as well.
And one man came up
to me, shared with me
that his brother had
committed suicide.
And that it was
his older brother
that he looked up
to his whole life.
And he said, man,
I've got to admire you
that you humbled yourself and
went to counseling instead
of committing suicide.
He said, we tried
everything to get my brother
to go to counseling so that he
wouldn't end up at this point.
And he didn't listen,
ended up killing himself.
And I thought to myself,
man, I could have been there.
I mean, people could be
talking about me today
in the past tense.
And I remember
that every morning
when I wake up, that
I was that close.
And when I see all
of the blessings
I have today, seeing my kids
graduating from college,
being able to buy a house
without a mortgage, all
of these blessings, George,
that I would have missed out on.
This is the greatest
act of my life.
And I would have ended the
story so dark and despondent.
And would have
missed all of this.
And so my message
to people is, man,
the greatest chapter
is yet to be written.
I mean, you're down
right now, but this
is like "Rocky I."
"Rocky II" is coming,
and you're going to
win the next fight.
>>NOORY: That's right.
And three, and four.
>>PARIS: That's
right, that's right.
There's so much brighter
days ahead for you.
>>NOORY: Even during
your darkest moment,
it's going to get better.
>>PARIS: And George, you
know, it's so hard for people
to believe this.
Because I don't know if you've
ever dealt with depression,
but depression is a
serious, serious illness.
And it could be
completely unrelated
from your circumstances.
In my case, it was directly
related to my circumstance.
People like Marie
Osmond, she shares
the story of her depression.
And so many celebrities can
share-- and I can tell you,
there is a point in depression,
George, where you literally
are in so much pain emotionally,
that you don't want to live.
You literally are--
it's like every breath
is taking everything you have
to breathe that next breath.
>>NOORY: You have no energy.
You have nothing.
But you have to pull
yourself out of that.
When you wrote the book, "How to
Pray for a Financial Miracle,"
tell me what you
wanted people who
read that book to
come away with.
>>PARIS: Well
George, that title's
a little bit provocative.
And I'll get some weird
emails from people
that will say, this
can't be a godly book,
you're writing about
praying to God for money.
And--
>>NOORY: Your god is greed.
>>PARIS: Right, right.
And in the book, I talk about
the bag of money prayer, which
is what I consider to be
sort of the lowest form.
The laziest prayer.
Which is, God, I need
$1,000 by Friday.
And you just expect to
maybe wake up one morning,
and there's a bag of money
sitting on your kitchen table,
or on your front porch, with
a note that says, here's
the money.
Thanks for asking,
and here you go.
Signed, God.
It's not-- I start--
>>NOORY: It doesn't
quite happen that way.
>>PARIS: Yeah,
here's how the prayer
system works that I developed.
It's an 11 step process.
The first step is to be thankful
and grateful for everything
you have.
I don't know why this is, I
could speculate for hours.
But when you approach God with a
grateful heart, it does really,
I think it does a
couple of things.
I think it lets him
know that you get it.
All of the stuff that
he's done for you already.
As I say in the
book, I don't care
what your financial
situation is.
A multimillionaire
with six months to live
that has a terminal
cancer diagnosis
would change places
with you in a heartbeat.
If you're feeling down, go
visit a children's cancer ward
in your local hospital.
Many times we over magnify
what our problems are.
So step one is being
grateful, being thankful.
This is biblical.
It also just makes
a lot of sense
to sit down and take
an inventory of, hey,
I've still got my health.
I've still got my marriage.
I've still got my family.
I've still got my mind.
I've lost all my money, but--
>>NOORY: I've got myself.
>>PARIS: Like my counselor told
me, he says, look, he said,
you're not-- you're obviously
a very intelligent guy.
I mean, you've got to this--
written all these books, been
on all these TV shows,
you made all this money.
You think you're not going to
be able to go back and find
something else to do, or
some variation of what
you're-- and you know, it really
is interesting how you look
at yourself in the most
pessimistic perspective.
The second thing
is to say to God,
look, what have I done to
contribute to this mess?
And take some ownership there.
Because I think
that's important.
For you to realize maybe,
look, I didn't have a budget.
I was spending more
than I had coming in.
I was living on credit cards.
I quit my job before
I found a new one.
I mean, these are
things that we do.
>>NOORY: We reap what
we sow, don't we?
>>PARIS: We do.
And then to ask God, what are
you trying to teach me in this?
There's a lesson
in so many things.
I mean, maybe there's
a lesson in why
you're going through what
you're going through.
And I also get into a lot
about, George, being open,
going in these
prayer sessions where
you spend two hours with a
yellow pad, and you say to God,
I'm going to listen.
I'm not here to talk and be
giving all my requests to you
like you're Santa Claus.
I'm just going to listen.
Tell me what I need to do.
Give me wisdom, God,
and tell me what to do.
And I come back from these
prayer sessions, George,
with seven or eight
pages of notes
on my yellow pad
of things, ideas.
One of my friends, he
never went to college,
and he laughed when
he told me this story.
He decided in his mid
30s to go to college.
He goes to the local
community college,
signs up for an 18
month course to become
a respiratory therapist.
Now this guy, he's
got tattoos all over,
and you'd never think of
him as a hospital worker.
So he goes, and he
graduates, does very well.
He laughed when he
told me, he says,
Jim, I make more money than
most of the doctors do.
I walk around the hospital
with a white doctor's coat on,
lab coat on, and a stethoscope.
And people think I'm a doctor.
But I'm just a
respiratory therapist.
And he said, you know what,
he said, in a couple of years,
I'm going to be starting
my own oxygen delivery,
where I go to people's
homes and provide
this therapy in their home.
And I'm going to be making
double what I already make now.
And he did this in 18 months.
And so I point out in
the book that, look,
there's parts of the Dakotas
that have 0% unemployment.
Well, maybe you don't want
to get in the oil business.
You could get retrained
to do something.
But look, they need teachers.
They need service workers.
They need people to cut hair.
They need police officers.
>>NOORY: He was smart
enough to realize.
>>PARIS: Yeah, so
you find a way.
Maybe you're a salesman, and
you're selling real estate.
And the real estate
market has collapsed.
Well, you might think,
well, I'll go kill myself.
Or, maybe you'll start
selling medical equipment.
Because that's where
the money is today.
So there is a plan out there
for you, and in this world
that we're living in
where things are changing
so quickly, George,
people have to many times
reinvent themselves.
I read an article the
other day that said
the average adult
in their career
will probably go in five
different directions.
You'll have five completely
different careers
over your adult working years.
And so when one of
these chapters closes,
all this means is
that you've got
to look for the next
chapter to start.
I got a flyer a couple of
weeks ago in my mailbox.
Our community, our
local adult education,
is offering for $2,000,
George, you can go at night.
Two or three nights a
week, for 2,000 bucks,
and you can get certified to
be a network internet security
expert.
Get this credential for $2,000.
I thought to myself, man,
a guy could go and do
that a couple of nights a
week, and with all this hacking
that's going on, and what
happened with Target,
and all of this stuff--
>>NOORY: I know, it's
going to be huge.
>>PARIS: You come out with
a credential like that
for a couple thousand
dollars, and now you're
a network security guy.
>>NOORY: A company
would hire you.
>>PARIS: You-- absolutely.
If not, you could
be a consultant,
probably flying
all over the world.
So there's so many
new opportunities.
As much as we-- you know I was
sad, my bookstore in Palm Coast
closed this last week.
>>NOORY: It's a tough business.
Bookstores are tough.
>>PARIS: But you know what,
the bookstores are closing,
but now we have the
Kindle, and ebooks,
and now this is like a whole
new opportunity for writers
to be able to start writing
books that could be ebooks.
>>NOORY: People
are still reading.
>>PARIS: So I know it
sounds like a trite saying,
but for every door that
closes, another door
is opening somewhere.
But you have to
be open to seeing
that there are opportunities
out there for everybody.
>>NOORY: How important
is erasing negativity
from what you want to do?
Case in point, my
mother always used
to tell me a story
that I'm going
to remember for the
rest of my life.
And it's very short.
And it has to do with
just, life itself.
And she basically
said, and it was
about an individual,
who said, "I
cried because I had
no shoes, until I
saw a man with no feet."
And that tells it--
that's everything.
You know it?
>>PARIS: Well, George, you
know, every day when we wake up,
I think we have a
conscious choice
to make whether we want to
look in the rear view mirror
or look out the windshield.
You know, I've
always believed this,
and it's something
that I've learned,
that I can't control what's
going to happen in the future.
I have no control over that.
As much as I can plan,
I don't have a control.
I don't have a control over
what's already happened to me.
That's already happened.
I mean, unless one
of your other guests
can figure out
time travel, and we
can go back and fix the past.
>>NOORY: We're working on it.
>>PARIS: I know we are.
But all I can do is
control the present moment.
And you know what?
As much as in one
way George, there's
sort of an uneasiness
about that,
it's like, this is all
that I have control over
is this moment.
But there is a peace
that you can enter into,
that you can sit in an
airport and be frustrated
that your plane is
late, or this has
happened with your
car, or this--
or you can sit there and say,
man, what's going on around me?
I'm looking around me.
Maybe there's someone here that
just got a cancer diagnosis.
Maybe there's somebody
here that just
lost their house to foreclosure.
Look at all these
people around me.
And I start praying for
people that are around me.
And I start thinking about
the blessings that I have.
And I'll say, maybe there's
a good little coffee
shop I can find,
or a book that I'm
going to find in a
bookstore in here.
And when you start
living like that,
your whole life will change.
When you start looking at every
moment as just an opportunity
to just rest in God, and
realize that you can't control
the future, you can't
control the past.
All you have is
the present moment.
>>NOORY: What does
prayer mean to you?
And what is prayer?
>>PARIS: Well George, I'll tell
you that for a lot of years
I didn't pray at all.
I was like, sort of--
>>NOORY: And it
doesn't mean religious.
>>PARIS: No, no, no.
Right.
Exactly.
In fact, I've said
this on your show,
that I'm a big
critic of religion.
I think religion is in
many ways a scam that
is used to control people.
To get their money.
But I'm talking about a
relationship with God,
which has nothing
to do with religion.
Although religion would
try to own that, it's not.
What I'm talking about
when I talk about prayer,
and as a kid, I grew up,
you pray at your meal,
thank you, God, for my meal.
You pray at bedtime.
Those kinds of prayers.
But as I became an
adult, I started to pray.
And I'll tell you
how I prayed, George.
Is I would come up with my own
plans, and I would go to God.
And I would say,
God, bless my plan.
That was my prayer.
And I realize now, I can
laugh, how foolish that was.
That here I was, asking
God to enter into my plan
instead of entering
into his plan,
and asking him what is
your plan for my life?
And that's how I prayed.
And I also prayed, and prayer
to me was like a broadcast.
They say the internet
is now social media 2.0,
it's a conversation.
It's not just, you post
something on the internet,
but people talk back to you.
Well hey, this is prayer
2.0 for Jim Paris.
This is the idea that, I pray
in a way where I shut my mouth,
and quiet my mind.
And I say to God, what do you
want to tell me right now?
And I bring an empty pad
of paper, which in the book
I give people--
>>NOORY: It's like
Neale Donald Walsh,
when he wrote
"Conversations with God."
Where all he did,
he slept in his car.
And he sketched things
and wrote things.
>>PARIS: And I tell people,
when you go into these prayer
sessions, George, don't question
anything that comes to mind.
There will be times later
to pray about those things
again and refine those ideas.
But I would come out of
these prayer sessions
where it would just be me
saying, God, this is Jim.
I'm here.
What do you want to tell me?
And I'd have that pen ready.
And I would just wait and
listen for the voice of God,
and the ideas and
the information
that I got in those
prayer sessions.
I would come, seven,
eight pages of things
that I had written down.
And I still have many of
those yellow pads today.
And I just think to myself, what
if I had started listening--
>>NOORY: A long time ago.
>>PARIS: So much younger.
Where would I be today?
And the idea that God,
the God of the universe
wants to actually
communicate with us,
this is such a foreign
concept to people,
that it actually scares them.
I've had people send me
emails after they've heard me
on your radio program
and other programs,
where they've gone into a
prayer session like this,
and they said that for the
first time in their life,
they felt the presence
of God, and they
felt this communication
happening,
and it literally scared them.
Because they had never had
that experience before.
And I was there.
I remember the first time
that that happened to me.
It literally brought
me almost to my knees,
when you feel the
presence of God,
and that God does want
to communicate with us.
So that's what the
book is all about.
It's not about praying for a
mystical, magical bag of money
to appear.
But it's about asking for
God's will in your life.
And instead of saying,
God, this is my plan.
Bless my plan.
Going in and saying, God,
what is your plan for me?
Because really the truth
is that God's will is
what we would want to have
happen if we knew everything
he knows.
We don't know
everything that's going
to happen to us in the future.
We don't have that information.
So I believe that if we knew
everything that God knows,
that what is happening
to us right now
is what we would actually design
to happen to us right now.
But we don't have
all that information.
So it's about seeking
God's will, George.
Being open to hearing
what he has to say.
And what I mean by that is,
you know, be willing to move.
What if God says, move.
I remember I was in
Pittsburgh a few years ago,
when all of the oil-- or the
steel industry was collapsing,
and I was talking
to a cab driver.
I said, well, you're
telling me how bad it was.
I said, why don't people move
from Pittsburgh if it's so bad?
And he turned around,
and he looked at me
with the strangest look.
He said, people don't
move from Pittsburgh.
If you're born in Pittsburgh,
you stay in Pittsburgh.
And I thought to myself
man, this country
was based on rugged
individualism.
I mean, we would pack up the
whole family in a covered wagon
without there even being roads.
And you'd just go
through the forest
to get to the other side.
What happened to that?
People being willing
to change careers,
people being
willing to downsize.
You know, I don't make as
much money as I used to.
>>NOORY: Are you happier?
>>PARIS: I'm happier,
but you know what?
I don't need the money
that I used to make.
I live a debt free life.
I have a nice little sailboat.
I go to my martial arts classes
about five over six hours
a week.
My wife and I, we go out to
dinner a couple of nights
a week.
I've got two dogs that I
spend a lot of time jogging
with in the neighborhood.
It doesn't take a lot--
>>NOORY: You're at peace.
>>PARIS: It doesn't take a
lot to really be satisfied.
And many times, we're
like that proverbial mouse
that's on the treadmill,
chasing that piece of cheese--
>>NOORY: Going nowhere.
>>PARIS: But George, I
got the piece of cheese.
I bit into it.
I didn't like it.
And then someone stole the
piece of cheese from me,
and now I realize I don't really
want that piece of cheese again
anyway.
>>NOORY: There's more
to life than the cheese.
>>PARIS: It is.
It's a journey.
It really is.
And everybody's going to have
a different take on this,
but the book is very nuanced.
You know, when you say, how to
pray for a financial miracle,
it's going to draw in a lot
of different kinds of people
that will grab a book like this.
But the one thing that I
hear from people overall
is they just can't believe the
stories of what happened to me.
And I'll tell you,
going from a guy that
was ready to commit
suicide to a guy that
was able to go to
a closing and buy
a house with no mortgage,
that's a journey.
>>NOORY: That is a journey.
>>PARIS: And that's my story.
>>NOORY: What a great journey.
Who's the person that we
used to watch on late night
television who was selling
these little tiny ads
in the newspaper to make money?
He ended up being arrested.
He committed suicide.
>>PARIS: Don Lapre.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
I liked that guy.
>>PARIS: I really did, too.
I bought some of his
stuff too, because--
>>NOORY: I did too, as a
kid, or a younger person.
I said, I want that.
>>PARIS: I thought
it was interesting.
>>NOORY: What goes
through somebody?
Because his empire
collapsed, much like yours,
but he finished it.
>>PARIS: Well you know,
when people go to prison--
I remember when I was
in bankruptcy court,
there was a man that you
have to go up to the judge
and explain to the trustee why
you're filing for bankruptcy.
Sort of a formality.
But a man went before
me, and he was probably
in his early '80s, George.
And he was steadied
on either side
by what appeared to
be his adult children.
And he could hardly walk, and
he was crying so profusely,
sobbing, and he
says to the trustee,
he says, I'm so
ashamed to be here.
I've never believed
in bankruptcy.
But in order to
save my mobile home,
because of my medical bills, I
have no choice but to do this.
And that was a guy that
went two before me.
So I thought, man.
But in any case,
back to Don Lapre.
When you're sentenced to
federal prison, and people--
a lot of people commit suicide
before going to prison.
But there are people
that go to prison,
and everything they
imagine prison would
be, it turns out not to be that.
In fact, they go there, they
get another college degree,
they make new friends.
They've now got some fantastic
story to write a book about.
And many of these people
come out of prison,
and they're a bigger hit than
before they went to prison.
Look at Martha Stewart.
So again, the story really
is that your perception
at the moment is,
this is the end.
But it's not.
>>NOORY: It may even
be the beginning.
>>PARIS: It very well could be.
In fact, my counselor, he said
to me, one thing that really
changed my life,
in fact, we were
talking about Bill Clinton.
And he said to
me, he says, think
about Bill Clinton for a moment.
He's caught in this
big sexual scandal,
here he is, the President
of the United States.
>>NOORY: Embarrassing.
>>PARIS: You couldn't
be-- the word
couldn't have gotten out
any-- worldwide, you're on TV.
I did not have sex
with that-- he says,
look at what he went through.
But he could choose to
interpret that one of two ways.
He could say, my life is over.
I need to resign
from the presidency,
and to become a
recluse, and to just
live in obscurity for
the rest of my life.
Some men may have
made that choice.
And he didn't.
He said, well--
>>NOORY: It's like it
didn't even phase him.
>>PARIS: It's an
event that happened,
I'll do my best
damage control, I'm
not going to resign
from the presidency.
And he's now one of the
most popular figures
in American culture.
>>NOORY: He's making
millions on speeches.
>>PARIS: And books.
And people don't even
remember that whole episode
to a large degree.
So, the meaning, George, that
we assign to these events
is not right in the moment
when you're looking at it,
saying, the guy's in the
driveway right now repossessing
my car.
It couldn't be any lower.
I'm standing here in bankruptcy.
They're coming to
evict me from my house.
It's-- my house is
being foreclosed.
My wife is leaving me because
our finances have collapsed.
At that moment, you're going
to define that moment in a way
that my life is over.
There's no point in living.
But the truth is that it is not
only far less dark than what
you're seeing right
there, but here's
the amazing thing about it.
There's some kind of a weird,
amazing opportunity that
is a part of that
car being taken away.
You're probably going to
find-- if you pray about this,
and have the right
attitude, you're probably
going to end up in a
better car with a lower
payment or no
payments, if you allow
those circumstances
to unravel, and you
deal with that in
a positive way.
This is what I've learned,
which is so amazing.
And when you realize that no
matter what happens to me,
I can choose to interpret
that one of two ways.
I could put a negative spin on
it, or a positive spin on it.
Man, if God is with me
in this, I don't care.
I'll go to prison.
I'll go to the-- I'll go to
the gates of hell if I have to,
if God is with me.
And something-- I mean, if I
ended up at the gates of hell,
I could come back from that and
write one helluva book right?
>>NOORY: It would probably
be turned into a movie.
What's the main message you want
people to get from your book,
"How to Pray for a
Financial Miracle."
>>PARIS: The main
message is this.
That no matter how desperate
your financial circumstances
are, there is a way out.
And God will give you
wisdom if you ask for it.
George, he will give
you a specific plan.
And if you're open
to it, he'll give you
all kinds of ideas and
directions to go in.
If you're simply open to
this, and you seek him.
God is the last place, he's
the last person we go to.
We call up everybody
to borrow money.
We start buying self help books.
We're doing all
these different kinds
of things trying to
figure it out on our own,
and we wait until it gets
to the absolute worst
moment, like I did.
Well you know what, I'm
going to kill myself.
Maybe I'll turn to God.
And my advice to
people is, no matter
how bad it gets financially,
George, turn to God now.
Don't wait until you get
down to the last dollar
or the last penny.
Turn to God now.
And accept the
fact that no matter
how bad it is, that he can
turn it all into a positive.
And when you do that, you
start embracing all this stuff,
it almost becomes funny.
Here I am, I'm foreclosed
out of my house.
The next day I move
into a bigger house.
I was crying until
I started laughing.
And to see--
>>NOORY: It's almost comical.
>>PARIS: How God is
there taking care of us,
and we don't even recognize
it when it's happening.
>>NOORY: Jim, thanks
for your advice.
>>PARIS: Thank you so much, sir.
>>NOORY: Thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>PARIS: Pleasure to be here.
>>NOORY: Well, you know,
we all as human beings
will go through this
dark side of our life.
The secret is to pull
yourself from that abyss
and wait for a brighter day.
I'm George Noory, and thank
you for watching us here
on "Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]